Donors/Samples/Datasets TSVs (#2060)
hubmapconsortium/portal-ui: context/app/markdown/apis.md

# APIs and Data Downloads

HuBMAP incorporates a wide range of data and metadata, developed by a number of separate teams,

> so unfortunately there is no single "HuBMAP API". Depending on your needs, there are different places to begin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and there is no single "HuBMAP API". Depending on your needs, there are different places to begin.
```

## Data or metadata for a single dataset

On a dataset page you can:
- Download the backing JSON by appending `.json` to the URL, or clicking the document icon in the upper right.
- Download just the metadata as a key-value TSV by clicking the download button beside the "Metadata" section header.
- Download the data files through Globus, via a link in the "Files" section.

## Metadata for all donors, samples, or datasets

For metadata in TSV form, visit [`/api/v0/donors.tsv`](/api/v0/donors.tsv),
[`/api/v0/samples.tsv`](/api/v0/samples.tsv), or [`/api/v0/datasets.tsv`](/api/v0/datasets.tsv).
The datasets TSV has a large number of columns, because different assay types have different metadata fields.

> If you are logged in and have sufficient privs, these will include unpublished data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are logged in and have sufficient access privileges, these will include unpublished data.
```

## Query metadata

> To more flexibly query metadata, an [Elasticsearch endpoint](https://smart-api.info/ui/7aaf02b838022d564da776b03f357158) is available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To more flexibly query metadata, the [HuBMAP Search API](https://smart-api.info/ui/7aaf02b838022d564da776b03f357158) is available.
```

Author: Add missing period, back-ticks, https://www.w3.org/QA/Tips/noClickHere
```suggestion
To more flexibly query metadata, the [HuBMAP Search API](https://smart-api.info/ui/7aaf02b838022d564da776b03f357158) is available.
This web service is a thin wrapper around the [Elasticsearch `_search` method](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-search.html).
```

> - If you haven't used it before, Elasticsearch query syntax is non-trivial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Elasticsearch query syntax is non-trivial and only recommended for expert users.
```

- The response structure is not documented, and we do not guarantee the stability of responses.

> ## Create datasets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Edit HuBMAP provenance entities: datasets, tissue samples and donors
```

Author: ```suggestion
## Edit HuBMAP datasets, samples, and donors
```

[All API microservices](/docs/apis) developed by the IEC are documented at
[SmartAPI](https://smart-api.info/registry?q=hubmap).

> These APIs support our internal UIs, and are unlikely to be useful to most external users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These APIs support our internal UIs, and are likely of limited value to most external users.
```

> These APIs support our internal UIs, and are unlikely to be useful to most external users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The  [HuBMAP Entity API](https://smart-api.info/ui/0065e419668f3336a40d1f5ab89c6ba3) can be used to create, update and retrieve provenance entities which consist of three base types donors, tissue samples and datasets.
Creating and updating of entities require internal access, but published entities can be programmatically retrieved by anyone. 
```

Author: Filed https://github.com/hubmapconsortium/portal-docs/issues/70: Should clean up docs if we don't think they're worth referencing.

## Query gene expression data

It is possible to query gene expression data across datasets.

> The [API](https://github.com/hubmapconsortium/cross_modality_query#usage) is complex and not well documented,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [API](https://github.com/hubmapconsortium/cross_modality_query#usage) is complex,
```

> The [API](https://github.com/hubmapconsortium/cross_modality_query#usage) is complex and not well documented,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [API](https://github.com/hubmapconsortium/cross_modality_query#usage) is complex,
```
